Section 1: What is centralization / consolidation & why does it matter?

A defining feature of the internet is “its lack of any single point of technical, political, or economic control” [Nottingham 1]. However, that this model will continue to underpin the architecture of the Internet (as a “network of networks”) cannot be taken for granted, particularly as economic and political forces bear an increasing role on the Internet’s architecture and design. The values, as well as political and economic forces that are shaping the Internet’s architecture have been explored by the IETF through RFC 3935 [Alvestrand]. Reflections on the evolution of the end-to-end principle and the impact on the end-user are also the subject of multiple RFCs [Nottingham 2 ; Carpenter] In particular, and facilitated by the decentralization of the internet group (DINRG), there has been a discussion of what constitutes consolidation and centralization at the IETF. Additionally, there have been discussions of the role of internet protocols in either facilitating or hindering the free flow of information online, with examinations of the implications of protocol design on the risk of censorship of content [discussions on the HR implications of internet protocols and the outputs of the IETF have also been explored in the HRPC and RFC 9620]

What is missing is an analysis of the impact centralisation, consolidation and fragmentation trends have on the end-user, and in particular on end-users’ ability to access and disseminate online content (e.g. the network’s resilience to censorship). At a time when economic and political forces are increasingly having an impact on how the internet evolves, with governments leveraging control over the network there is a need to examine the role of protocol design and deployment on end-users’ freedom of expression online.

To address this gap, this document (1) assesses the current status of discussions relevant to centralization, consolidation and fragmentation at the IETF; (2) examines the impact of these trends on end-users from the perspective of the risks of online censorship; and (3) recommends an approach for understanding the relevance and current status of these discussions focused on the end-user; and lays out an approach to future work.

Section 2: Defining key concepts 

Consolidation has been discussed within DINRG interchangeably with centralization. However, it is important to distinguish between the two to understand whether and how internet protocol design intersects with broader economic and political forces. Here, we will attempt to set out the differences between the two concepts and make the case for the importance of clearly defining these terms to understand the potential impact on end-users.

The terms "centralization" and "consolidation" have been used interchangeably at the IETF, even in texts relating to the definition of either centralization or consolidation. [McFadden; Huitema]. Both terms refer to the concentration of power - whether over consumers, the technical architecture underpinning the internet, financial, or otherwise [Lazanski]. However, within each term, there is a more granular understanding of how each can manifest, whether in operational impact, developmental, technical, etc.

For example, discussions in previous I-Ds [Lazanski; McFadden], illustrate how consolidation is primarily concerned with market or economic trends and forces that impact the economy, and which can influence network and protocol design. This can encompass market concentration and security, DNS consolidation, and supply chains, with implications for interoperability and Internet architecture as well as end users. “Centralization” has been defined as the state of affairs where a single entity or a small group of them can observe, capture, control, or extract rent from the operation or use of an Internet function [Nottingham 1]. 

Any effort to differentiate between the two terms largely comes down to whether the impact on the network and the end-user arises primarily or solely from economic and market forces, the design or standards or protocols, or the capabilities permitted by standards and protocols. In distinguishing between the two, it is important to recognise that consolidation arises from external market and political forces and centralization could arise from creating or facilitating architectural changes at the protocol level, which may feed into and in turn shape external forces in some way. In other words, whereas definitions of consolidation focus on the outcome of the realities of the market, centralization is broader: and can be an outcome of protocol choices, or engineering decisions. 

It should be said that this concentration of economic forces has been said to have a positive impact in so far as it has enabled investment in the internet’s evolution by increasing resources available and facilitating the development and implementation of key protocols: e.g the implementation of key protocols such as DNS-over-HTTPS which has provided privacy and security protection to end-users across the network [Lazanski] as well as investment into infrastructure and the services that ultimately impact consumers (including end-users). 

However, from the perspective of the end-user, the “result” of both centralization and consolidation trends has a chilling effect on the free flow of information by leading to fewer entities with more control, a concentration of ‘choke points on the network’, and the potential for single points of failure. These effects together put the future of a single, interoperable internet at risk, and have a particular impact on end-users, which we will outline in the following section. 

While there is no singular definition of internet fragmentation, it is generally understood to refer to the consequences of threats to an open, interoperable internet. In this section, current frameworks and definitions are summarised, in order to form the basis of the following analysis, which examines commonalities between discussions on internet fragmentation, centralization and consolidation and posits a common ‘theme’ or area of concern for continued examination. 

The two main frameworks to which will be referencing in this section include that of the World Economic Forum (WEF) and the Internet Governance Forum’s Policy Network on Internet Fragmentation (PNIF). The WEF framework (developed in 2016) and the PNIF’s framework (developed in 2023) both lay out three categories or elements of fragmentation, (respectively) which - it is said - are either happening to various degrees or could happen (should certain conditions be met).

The first type is technical fragmentation, which refers to the conditions in the underlying infrastructure that impede the ability of systems to fully interoperate and exchange data packets and of the Internet to function consistently at all endpoints. According to the WEF framework, this can happen within four areas: internet addressing; interconnection; naming and security. Similarly, the PNIF framework refers to a range of challenges to interoperability at the transport layer that makes the Internet work as a medium of communications globally. The framework recognises that the extent to which technical fragmentation is happening or there is a risk of it happening is contested. 

The second type is governmental fragmentation, meaning the government policies and actions that constrain or prevent certain uses of the Internet to create, distribute, or access information resources [Drake]. Examples include content and censorship; e-commerce and trade; national security; privacy and data protection; data localization; and fragmentation as an overarching national strategy (e.g cyber sovereignty). The PNIF framework also includes in its scope the interactions between global Internet governance and standards bodies, that can result in duplicative or clashing standards/norms and thus creates possible impacts on the technical layer and on the end user.

The WEF includes a category of commercial fragmentation, which refers to business practices that constrain or prevent certain uses of the Internet to create, distribute, or access information resources. Examples include peering and standardization; network neutrality; walled gardens; geo-localization and geo-blocking; and infrastructure-related intellectual property protection. 

Whereas the WEF framework does not position the end user in its framework, the PNIF includes a category on fragmentation of the user experience. User experience is the phenomenon by which different end-users of the Internet, when trying to perform the same action online, are presented with different content, options or interfaces. It is when such fragmentation is forced upon the end-user by other parties, or when it hampers the communication among end-users and their ability to access content and services, that it can deny the advantages and the freedoms that the Internet is supposed to offer. 

These types of fragmentation do not operate in silos and are often interconnected. Regulatory actions, such as efforts by governments to push users onto domestic networks, can lead to technical fragmentation: in the case of Iran, the government blocked domestic internet service provider’s (ISP) access to international gateways, which meant the global internet was centralised to only government-controlled getaways serving as the only access point for all international traffic and IP capacity and connectivity services in the country. These government-controlled getaways can facilitate censorship by preventing end-users in the country from accessing content hosted on international servers and forcing end-users to utilize servers that may expose identifiers [Article 19].Such actions can also lead to technical fragmentation whereby the domestic internet infrastructure is no longer interoperable with that of the global internet. This has serious ramifications for freedom of expression online, negatively impacting end-users ability to access and share information [PNIF], which we will unpack in the next section.

Section 3: How do these trends impact the end-user, particularly FoE/censorship risks? 



